I
“Eh bien, mon prince, G&#234;nes et Lucques ne sont plus que des apanages, des estates, de la famille Buonaparte.Non, je vous pr&#233;viens, que si vous ne me dites pas que nous avons la guerre, si vous vous permettez encore de pallier toutes les infamies, toutes les atrocit&#233;s de cet Antichrist (ma parole, j’y crois)—je ne vous connais plus, vous n’&#234;tes plus mon ami, vous n’&#234;tes plus my faithful slave, comme vous dites. Well, good evening, good evening. Je vois que je vous fais peur, sit down and tell me about it.”
So spoke, in July 1805, the renowned Anna Pavlovna Scherer, maid of honor and intimate of the empress Maria Feodorovna, greeting the important and high-ranking Prince Vassily, the first to arrive at her soir&#233;e. Anna Pavlovna had been coughing for several days. She had the grippe, as she put it (grippe was a new word then, used only by rare people). Little notes had been sent out that morning with a red-liveried footman, and on all of them without distinction there was written:
Si vous n’avez rien de mieux &#224; faire, Monsieur le comte (or mon prince), et si la perspective de passer la soir&#233;e chez une pauvre malade ne vous effraye pas trop, je serai charm&#233;e de vous voir chez moi entre 7 et 10 heures.
Annette Scherer.
“Dieu, quelle virulente sortie!” the entering prince replied, not ruffled in the least by such a reception. He was wearing an embroidered court uniform, stockings, shoes, and stars, and had a bright expression on his flat face.
He spoke that refined French in which our grandparents not only spoke but thought, and with those quiet, patronizing intonations which are proper to a significant man who has grown old in society and at court. He went over to Anna Pavlovna, kissed her hand, presenting her with his perfumed and shining bald pate, and settled comfortably on the sofa.
“Avant tout dites-moi, comment vous allez, ch&#232;re amie. Set me at ease,” he said, without changing his voice and in a tone in which, through propriety and sympathy, one could discern indifference and even mockery.
“How can one be well…when one suffers morally? Is it possible to remain at ease in our time, if one has any feeling?” said Anna Pavlovna. “You’ll stay the whole evening, I hope?”
“And the f&#234;te at the British ambassador’s? Today is Wednesday. I must put in an appearance,” said the prince. “My daughter will come to fetch me and take me there.”
“I thought today’s f&#234;te was cancelled. Je vous avoue que toutes ces f&#234;tes et tous ces feux d’artifice commencent &#224; devenir insipides.”
“If they had known that you wished it, the f&#234;te would have been cancelled,” said the prince, uttering out of habit, like a wound-up clock, things that he did not even wish people to believe.
“Ne me tourmentez pas. Eh bien, qu’a-t-on d&#233;cid&#233; par rapport &#224; la d&#233;p&#234;che de Novosilzoff?Vous savez tout.”
“What can I tell you?” said the prince, in a cold, bored tone. “Qu’a-t-on d&#233;cid&#233;? On a d&#233;cid&#233; que Buonaparte a br&#251;l&#233; ses vaisseaux, et je crois que nous sommes en train de br&#251;ler les n&#244;tres.”
Prince Vassily always spoke lazily, the way an actor speaks a role in an old play. Anna Pavlovna Scherer, on the contrary, despite her forty years, was brimming with animation and impulses.
Being an enthusiast had become her social position, and she sometimes became enthusiastic even when she had no wish to, so as not to deceive the expectations of people who knew her. The restrained smile that constantly played on Anna Pavlovna’s face, though it did not suit her outworn features, expressed, as it does in spoiled children, a constant awareness of her dear shortcoming, which she did not wish, could not, and found no need to correct.
In the midst of a conversation about political doings, Anna Pavlovna waxed vehement.
“Ah, don’t speak to me of Austria! Maybe I don’t understand anything, but Austria does not want and has never wanted war. She’s betraying us. Russia alone must be the savior of Europe. Our benefactor knows his lofty calling and will be faithful to it. That is the one thing I trust in. Our kind and wonderful sovereign is faced with the greatest role in the world, and he is so virtuous and good that God will not abandon him, and he will fulfill his calling to crush the hydra of revolution, which has now become still more terrible in the person of this murderer and villain. We alone must redeem the blood of the righteous one. In whom can we trust, I ask you?…England with her commercial spirit will not and cannot understand all the loftiness of the emperor Alexander’s soul. She refused to evacuate Malta. She wants to see, she searches for ulterior motives in our acts. What did they say to Novosiltsov? Nothing. They did not, they could not understand the self-denial of our emperor, who wants nothing for himself and everything for the good of the world. And what have they promised? Nothing. And what they did promise will not be done! Prussia has already declared that Bonaparte is invincible and that all Europe can do nothing against him…And I don’t believe a single word of Hardenberg or of Haugwitz.Cette fameuse neutralit&#233; prussienne, ce n’est qu’un pi&#232;ge. I trust only in God and in the lofty destiny of our dear emperor. He will save Europe!…” She suddenly stopped with a mocking smile at her own vehemence.
“I think,” the prince said, smiling, “that if they sent you instead of our dear Wintzingerode, you would take the Prussian king’s consent by storm. You’re so eloquent! Will you give me tea?”
“At once. &#192; propos,” she added, calming down again, “I’ll have two very interesting men here tonight, le vicomte de Mortemart, il est alli&#233; aux Montmorency par les Rohan, one of the best French families. He’s one of the good &#233;migr&#233;s, one of the real ones. And then l’abb&#233; Morio —do you know that profound mind? He’s been received by the sovereign. Do you know him?”
“Ah! I’ll be very glad,” said the prince. “Tell me,” he added, as if just recalling something and with special casualness, though what he asked about was the main purpose of his visit, “is it true that l’imp&#233;ratrice-m&#232;re wants Baron Funke to be named first secretary in Vienna? C’est un pauvre sire, ce baron, &#224; ce qu’il para&#238;t.” Prince Vassily wanted his son to be appointed to this post, which, through the empress Maria Feodorovna, had been solicited for the baron.
Anna Pavlovna all but closed her eyes as a sign that neither she nor anyone else could judge of the empress’s good pleasure or liking.
“Monsieur le baron de Funke a &#233;t&#233; recommand&#233; &#224; l’imp&#233;ratrice-m&#232;re par sa soeur,” she merely said in a sad, dry tone. The moment Anna Pavlovna mentioned the empress, her face suddenly presented a profound and sincere expression of devotion and respect, combined with sadness, which happened each time she referred to her exalted patroness in conversation. She said that her majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke beaucoup d’estime, and her eyes again clouded over with sadness.
The prince lapsed into indifferent silence. Anna Pavlovna, with her courtly and feminine adroitness and ready tact, wanted both to swat the prince for daring to make such a pronouncement about a person recommended to the empress, and at the same time to comfort him.
“Mais &#224; propos de votre famille,” she said, “do you know that your daughter, since her coming out, fait les d&#233;lices de tout le monde? On la trouve belle, comme le jour.”
The prince bowed in a sign of respect and gratitude.
“I often think,” Anna Pavlovna went on after a moment’s silence, moving closer to the prince and smiling tenderly at him, as if to show thereby that the political and social conversations were at an end and a heart-to-heart one was beginning, “I often think how unfairly life’s good fortune is sometimes distributed. Why has fate given you two such nice children (excluding Anatole, your youngest, I don’t like him),” she put in peremptorily, raising her eyebrows, “such lovely children? And you really value them less than anyone and are therefore unworthy of them.”
And she smiled her rapturous smile.
“Que voulez-vous? Lavater aurait dit que je n’ai pas la bosse de la paternit&#233;,” said the prince.
“Stop joking. I wanted to talk seriously with you. You know, I’m displeased with your younger son. Just between us,” her face acquired a sad look, “there was talk about him at her majesty’s, and you were pitied…”
The prince did not reply, but she fell silent, looking at him significantly, waiting for a reply. Prince Vassily winced.
“What am I to do?” he said finally. “You know, I did all a father could for their upbringing, and they both turned out des imb&#233;ciles. Ippolit is at least an untroublesome fool, but Anatole is a troublesome one. That’s the only difference,” he said, smiling more unnaturally and animatedly than usual, and with that showing especially clearly in the wrinkles that formed around his mouth something unexpectedly coarse and disagreeable.
“Ah, why do such people as you have children? If you weren’t a father, I’d have nothing to reproach you for,” said Anna Pavlovna, raising her eyes pensively.
“Je suis votre faithful slave, et &#224; vous seule je puis l’avouer. My children—ce sont les entraves de mon existence. That’s my cross. I explain it that way to myself. Que voulez-vous?…” He paused, expressing with a gesture his submission to cruel fate.
Anna Pavlovna fell to thinking.
“Have you never thought of getting your prodigal son Anatole married? They say,” she observed, “that old maids ont la manie des marriages. I don’t feel I have that weakness yet, but I know one petite personne who is very unhappy with her father, une parente &#224; nous, une princesse Bolkonsky.” Prince Vassily did not reply, though, with the quickness of grasp and memory characteristic of society people, he showed by a nod of the head that he had taken this information into account.
“No, you know, this Anatole costs me forty thousand a year,” he said, obviously unable to restrain the melancholy course of his thoughts. He paused.
“How will it be in five years, if it goes on like this? Voil&#224; l’avantage d’&#234;tre p&#232;re. Is she rich, this princess of yours?”
“Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. You know, it’s the famous Prince Bolkonsky, already retired under the late emperor and nicknamed ‘the King of Prussia.’ He’s a very intelligent man, but an odd and difficult one. La pauvre petite est malheureuse comme les pierres. She has a brother, Kutuzov’s adjutant, the one who recently married Lise Meinen. He’ll come tonight.”
“&#201;coutez, ch&#232;re Annette,” said the prince, suddenly taking his interlocutor by the hand and pulling it down for some reason. “Arrangez-moi cette affaire et je suis votre faithful slave &#224; tout jamais (slafe—comme mon village headman &#233;crit des reports: f instead of v). She’s from a good family and rich. That’s all I need.”
And with those free and familiarly graceful movements which distinguished him, he took the maid of honor’s hand, kissed it, and, having kissed it, waved the maid-of-honorly hand a little, sprawled himself in an armchair, and looked away.
“Attendez,” Anna Pavlovna said, pondering. “Tonight I’ll discuss it with Lise (la femme du jeune Bolkonsky). And maybe something can be settled. Ce sera dans votre famille que je ferai mon apprentissage de vielle fille.”

II
Anna Pavlovna’s drawing room gradually began to fill up. The high nobility of Petersburg came, people quite diverse in age and character, but alike in the society they lived in. Prince Vassily’s daughter, the beautiful H&#233;l&#232;ne, came to fetch her father and go with him to the f&#234;te at the ambassador’s. She was wearing a ball gown with a monogram. The young little princess Bolkonsky, known as la femme la plus s&#233;duisante de P&#233;tersbourg, also came; married the previous winter, she did not go into high society now for reason of her pregnancy, but did still go to small soir&#233;es. Prince Ippolit, Prince Vassily’s son, came with Mortemart, whom he introduced; the abb&#233; Morio also came, and many others.
“Have you seen yet” or “have you made the acquaintance of ma tante?” Anna Pavlovna said to the arriving guests, and led them quite seriously to a little old lady in high ribbons, who had come sailing out of the next room as soon as the guests began to arrive, called them by name, slowly shifting her gaze from the guest to ma tante, and then walked away.
All the guests performed the ritual of greeting the totally unknown, totally uninteresting and unnecessary aunt. With sad, solemn sympathy, Anna Pavlovna followed their greetings, silently approving of them. To each of them ma tante spoke in the same expressions about his health, her own health, and the health of her majesty, which, thank God, was better that day. All those who went up to her, showing no haste for propriety’s sake, left the little old lady with a feeling of relief after the fulfillment of a heavy obligation, never to approach her again all evening.
The young princess Bolkonsky came with handwork in a gold-embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty upper lip with its barely visible black mustache was too short for her teeth, but the more sweetly did it open and still more sweetly did it sometimes stretch and close on the lower one. As happens with perfectly attractive women, her flaw—a short lip and half-opened mouth—seemed her special, personal beauty. Everyone felt cheerful looking at this pretty future mother full of health and liveliness, who bore her condition so easily. To old men and to bored, morose young ones it seemed that they themselves came to resemble her, having been with her and spoken with her for a time. Anyone who talked with her and saw her bright little smile at every word and her gleaming white teeth, which showed constantly, thought himself especially amiable that day. And that is what each of them thought.
The little princess, waddling, went around the table with small, quick steps, her bag of handwork hanging on her arm, and, cheerfully straightening her dress, sat down on the sofa near the silver samovar, looking as though everything she did was a partie de plaisir for her and for everyone around her.
J’ai apport&#233; mon ouvrage,” she said, unclasping her reticule and addressing them all together.
“Look, Annette, ne me jouez pas un mauvais tour,” she turned to the hostess. “Vouz m’avez &#233;crit que c’&#233;tait une toute petite soir&#233;e; voyez comme je suis attif&#233;e.”
And she spread her arms to show her elegant gray, lace-trimmed dress, tied slightly below the breasts with a broad ribbon.
“Soyez tranquille, Lise, vous serez toujours la plus jolie,” Anna Pavlovna replied.
“Vous savez, mon mari m’abandonne,” she went on in the same tone, turning to a general, “il va se faire tuer. Dites moi, pourquoi cette vilaine guerre?” she said to Prince Vassily and, not waiting for an answer, turned to Prince Vassily’s daughter, the beautiful H&#233;l&#232;ne.
“Quelle d&#233;licieuse personne, que cette petite princesse!” Prince Vassily said to Anna Pavlovna.
Soon after the little princess came a massive, fat young man with a cropped head, in spectacles, light-colored trousers of the latest fashion, a high jabot, and a brown tailcoat. This fat young man was the illegitimate son of a famous courtier from Catherine’s time, Count Bezukhov, who was now dying in Moscow. He did not serve anywhere yet, he had only just arrived from abroad, where he had been educated, and this was his first time in society. Anna Pavlovna greeted him with a nod reserved for people of the lowest hierarchy in her salon. But, despite this greeting of the lowest sort, at the sight of the entering Pierre uneasiness and fear showed in Anna Pavlovna’s face, like that expressed at the sight of something all too enormous and unsuited to the place. Though Pierre was indeed somewhat larger than the other men in the room, this fear could have referred only to the intelligent and at the same time shy, observant, and natural gaze which distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room.
“C’est bien aimable &#224; vous, monsieur Pierre, d’&#234;tre venu voir une pauvre malade,” Anna Pavlovna said to him, exchanging fearful looks with the aunt, to whom she was bringing him. Pierre burbled something incomprehensible and went on searching for something with his eyes. He smiled joyfully, merrily, bowed to the little princess as to a close acquaintance, and went up to the aunt. Anna Pavlovna’s fear was not in vain, because Pierre, without hearing out the aunt’s talk about her majesty’s health, walked away from her. The frightened Anna Pavlovna stopped him with the words:
“You don’t know the abb&#233; Morio? He’s a very interesting man…” she said.
“Yes, I’ve heard about his plan for eternal peace, and it’s very interesting, but hardly possible…”
“You think so?…” said Anna Pavlovna, in order to say something, and again turned to her duties as mistress of the house, but Pierre committed the reverse discourtesy. Earlier he had walked away without hearing out a lady who was talking to him; now he held with his conversation a lady who needed to leave him. Lowering his head and spreading his big feet, he began to explain to Anna Pavlovna why he thought that the abb&#233;’s plan was a chimera.
“We’ll talk later,” Anna Pavlovna said, smiling.
And, ridding herself of the young man who did not know how to live, she returned to her duties as mistress of the house and went on listening and looking out, ready to come to the rescue at any point where the conversation lagged. As the owner of a spinning mill, having put his workers in their places, strolls about the establishment, watching out for an idle spindle or the odd one squealing much too loudly, and hastens to go and slow it down or start it up at the proper speed—so Anna Pavlovna strolled about her drawing room, going up to a circle that had fallen silent or was too talkative, and with one word or rearrangement set the conversation machine running evenly and properly again. But amidst all these cares there could still be seen in her a special fear for Pierre. She glanced at him concernedly when he went over to listen to what was being talked about around Mortemart and went on to another circle where the abb&#233; was talking. For Pierre, brought up abroad, this soir&#233;e of Anna Pavlovna’s was the first he had seen in Russia. He knew that all the intelligentsia of Petersburg was gathered there, and, like a child in a toy shop, he looked everywhere at once. He kept fearing to miss intelligent conversations that he might have listened to. Looking at the self-assured and elegant expressions on the faces gathered here, he kept expecting something especially intelligent. Finally he went up to Morio. The conversation seemed interesting to him, and he stopped, waiting for a chance to voice his thoughts, as young people like to do.

III
Anna Pavlovna’s soir&#233;e got going. The spindles on all sides hummed evenly and ceaselessly. Besides ma tante, next to whom sat only one elderly lady with a thin, weepy face, somewhat alien to this brilliant company, the company had broken up into three circles. In one, mostly masculine, the center was the abb&#233; in another, of young people, it was the beautiful Princess H&#233;l&#232;ne, Prince Vassily’s daughter, and the pretty, red-cheeked little princess Bolkonsky, too plump for her age. In the third, it was Mortemart and Anna Pavlovna.
The viscount was a nice-looking young man, with soft features and manners, obviously regarded himself as a celebrity, but, from good breeding, modestly allowed himself to be made use of by the company in which he found himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously treating her guests to him. As a good ma&#238;tre d’h&#244;tel presents, as something supernaturally excellent, a piece of beef one would not want to eat if one saw it in the dirty kitchen, so that evening Anna Pavlovna served up to her guests first the viscount, then the abb&#233;, as something supernaturally refined. In Mortemart’s circle the conversation turned at once to the murder of the duc d’Enghien. The viscount said that the duc d’Enghien had perished from his own magnanimity and that there were special reasons for Bonaparte’s viciousness.
“Ah, voyons. Contez-nous cela, vicomte,” said Anna Pavlovna, joyfully sensing that something &#224; la Louis XV echoed in this phrase, “contez-nous cela, vicomte.”
The viscount bowed as a sign of submission and smiled politely. Anna Pavlovna circled around the viscount and invited everyone to listen to his story.
“Le vicomte a &#233;t&#233; personellement connu de monseigneur,” Anna Pavlovna whispered to one. “Le vicomte est un parfait conteur,” she said to another. “Comme on voit l’homme de la bonne compagnie,” she said to a third; and the viscount was presented to the company in a most refined and advantageous light, like a roast beef on a hot platter sprinkled with herbs.
The viscount was just about to begin his story and smiled subtly.
“Come over here, ch&#232;re H&#233;l&#232;ne,” Anna Pavlovna said to the beautiful princess, who was sitting some way off, forming the center of another circle.
Princess H&#233;l&#232;ne was smiling; she got up with the same unchanging smile of a perfectly beautiful woman with which she had entered the drawing room. Lightly rustling her white ball gown trimmed with ivy and moss, her white shoulders gleaming, her hair and diamonds shining, she walked straight on between the parted men, not looking at anyone, but smiling to everyone, and as if kindly granting each of them the right to admire the beauty of her figure, her full shoulders, her very exposed bosom and back, as the fashion then was, and, as if bringing with her the brilliance of a ball, approached Anna Pavlovna. H&#233;l&#232;ne was so good-looking that there was not only not a trace of coquetry to be seen in her, but, on the contrary, it was as if she was embarrassed by her unquestionable and all too strongly and triumphantly effective beauty. It was as if she wished but was unable to diminish the effect of her beauty.
“Quelle belle personne!” said everyone who saw her. As if struck by something extraordinary, the viscount shrugged his shoulders and lowered his eyes while she was seating herself before him and shining upon him that same unchanging smile.
“Madame, je crains pour mes moyens devant un pareil auditoire,” he said, inclining his head with a smile.
The princess rested the elbow of her bare, rounded arm on a little table and did not find it necessary to say anything. She waited, smiling. Throughout the story she sat erect, glancing occasionally now at her rounded, beautiful arm lying lightly on the table, now at the still more beautiful bosom on which she straightened a diamond necklace; she also straightened the folds of her gown several times, and, when the story produced an impression, turned to look at Anna Pavlovna and at once assumed the same expression as on the maid of honor’s face, and then settled back into a radiant smile. After H&#233;l&#232;ne, the little princess also came over from the tea table.
“Attendez-moi, je vais prendre mon ouvrage,” she said. “Voyons, &#224; quoi pensez-vous?” she turned to Prince Ippolit. “Apportez-moi mon reticule.”
The princess, smiling and talking with everyone, suddenly effected the transposition, and, taking a seat, cheerily settled herself.
“Now I feel good,” she said several times, and, asking them to begin, started to work.
Prince Ippolit fetched her reticule, came after her, and, moving his chair towards her, sat down close by.
Le charmant Hippolyte was striking in his extraordinary resemblance to his beautiful sister, and still more in being strikingly unattractive, despite that resemblance. The features of his face were the same as his sister’s, but in her everything was lit up by her joyous, self-contented, young, unchanging smile and the extraordinary classical beauty of her body. In her brother, on the contrary, the same face was clouded by idiocy and invariably expressed a self-assured peevishness, and his body was skinny and weak. His eyes, nose, and mouth all seemed to shrink into an indefinite and dull grimace, and his arms and legs always assumed an unnatural position.
“Ce n’est pas une histoire des revenants?” he said, sitting down near the princess and hastily affixing a lorgnette to his eyes, as if he was unable to start talking without this instrument.
“Mais non, mon cher,” the surprised storyteller said, shrugging his shoulders.
“C’est que je d&#233;teste les histoires des revenants,” said Prince Ippolit in such a tone that it was clear he had said these words and only then understood what they meant.
Because of the self-assurance with which he spoke, no one could make out whether what he had said was very clever or very stupid. He was wearing a dark green tailcoat, trousers the color of cuisse de nymphe effray&#233;e, as he said himself, stockings and shoes.
The vicomte told very nicely the then current anecdote that the duc d’Enghien had secretly gone to Paris to meet with Mlle George, and that there he had met Bonaparte, who also enjoyed the famous actress’s favors, and that there, having met the duke, Napoleon happened to fall into one of those faints he was prone to and found himself in the duke’s power, which the duke did not take advantage of, and that Bonaparte afterwards revenged himself for this magnanimity with the duke’s death.
The story was very nice and interesting, especially the moment when the rivals suddenly recognized each other, and the ladies, it seemed, were stirred.
“Charmant,” said Anna Pavlovna, looking questioningly at the little princess.
“Charmant,” whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into her work as if to signify that the interest and charm of the story kept her from going on working.
The viscount appreciated this silent praise and, smiling gratefully, began to go on; but at that moment Anna Pavlovna, who kept glancing at the young man she found so frightening, noticed that his conversation with the abb&#233; was much too loud and vehement, and she rushed to the rescue at the place of danger. Indeed, Pierre had managed to strike up a conversation with the abb&#233; about political balance, and the abb&#233;, obviously intrigued by the young man’s simplehearted vehemence, was developing his favorite idea before him. The two men listened and talked too animatedly and naturally, and it was this that Anna Pavlovna did not like.
“The means are European balance and the droit des gens,” the abb&#233; was saying. “Let a powerful state like Russia, famous for its barbarism, stand disinterestedly at the head of a union having as its purpose the balance of Europe—and it will save the world!”
“How are you going to find such balance?” Pierre began; but just then Anna Pavlovna came over and, with a stern glance at Pierre, asked the Italian how he was taking the local climate. The Italian’s face suddenly changed and acquired an insultingly false sweetness of expression, which was probably habitual with him in conversations with women.
“I’m so enchanted with the charms of the intelligence and cultivation of society, especially the women’s, where I have had the happiness to be received, that I have not yet had time to think about the climate,” he said.
Not letting go of the abb&#233; and Pierre, Anna Pavlovna, the better to keep an eye on them, joined them to the general circle.
Just then a new person entered the drawing room. This new person was the young Prince Andrei Bolkonsky, the little princess’s husband. Prince Bolkonsky was of medium height, a rather handsome young man with well-defined and dry features. Everything in his figure, from his weary, bored gaze to his quiet, measured gait, presented the sharpest contrast with his small, lively wife. Obviously, he not only knew everyone in the drawing room, but was also so sick of them that it was very boring for him to look at them and listen to them. Of all the faces he found so boring, the face of his pretty wife seemed to be the one he was most sick of. With a grimace that spoiled his handsome face, he turned away from her. He kissed Anna Pavlovna’s hand and, narrowing his eyes, looked around at the whole company.
“Vous vous enr&#244;lez pour la guerre, mon prince?” said Anna Pavlovna.
“Le g&#233;n&#233;ral Koutouzoff,” said Bolkonsky, emphasizing the last syllable, zoff, like a Frenchman, “a bien voulu de moi pour aide-de-camp…”
“Et Lise, votre femme?”
“She’ll go to the country.”
“Shame on you to deprive us of your lovely wife.”
“Andr&#233;,” said his wife, addressing her husband in the same coquettish tone in which she addressed others, “what a story the viscount told us about mademoiselle George and Bonaparte!”
Prince Andrei closed his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who had not taken his joyful, friendly eyes off Prince Andrei since he entered the drawing room, went up to him and took his arm. Prince Andrei, without turning around, wrinkled his face into a grimace, expressing vexation at whoever had taken his arm, but, seeing Pierre’s smiling face, suddenly smiled an unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
“Well, well!…So you, too, are in high society!” he said to Pierre.
“I knew you’d be here,” Pierre replied. “I’ll come to you for supper,” he added softly, so as not to interfere with the viscount, who was going on with his story. “May I?”
“No, you may not,” Prince Andrei said, laughing, letting Pierre know by the pressure of his hand that there was no need to ask. He was about to say more, but just then Prince Vassily and his daughter rose, and the men stood up to let them pass.
“You will excuse me, my dear viscount,” Prince Vassily said to the Frenchman, gently pulling him down on his chair by the sleeve, so that he would not stand up. “This unfortunate f&#234;te at the ambassador’s deprives me of my pleasure and interrupts you. I’m very sorry to leave your delightful soir&#233;e,” he said to Anna Pavlovna.
His daughter, Princess H&#233;l&#232;ne, lightly holding the folds of her gown, walked between the chairs, and the smile shone still more brightly on her beautiful face. Pierre looked with enraptured, almost frightened eyes at this beauty as she walked past him.
“Very good-looking,” said Prince Andrei.
“Very,” said Pierre.
Passing by, Prince Vassily seized Pierre by the hand and turned to Anna Pavlovna.
“Educate this bear for me,” he said. “He’s been living with me for a month, and this is the first time I’ve seen him in society. Nothing is so necessary for a young man as the company of intelligent women.”

IV
Anna Pavlovna smiled and promised to occupy herself with Pierre, who she knew was related to Prince Vassily through his father. The elderly lady who had so far been sitting with ma tante hastily got up and overtook Prince Vassily in the front hall. All the former sham interest disappeared from her face. Her kind, weepy face expressed only anxiety and fear.
“What can you tell me, Prince, about my Boris?” she said, overtaking him in the front hall. (She pronounced the name Boris with a special emphasis on the o.) “I cannot remain in Petersburg any longer. Tell me, what news can I bring my poor boy?”
Though Prince Vassily listened to the elderly lady reluctantly and almost impolitely, and even showed impatience, she smiled at him gently and touchingly, and even took him by the arm to keep him from walking away.
“It won’t cost you anything to say a word to the sovereign, and he’ll be transferred straight away to the guards,” she pleaded.
“Believe me, Princess, I’ll do all I can,” replied Prince Vassily, “but it’s hard for me to ask the sovereign. I’d advise you to turn to Rumyantsev through Prince Golitsyn—that would be smarter.”
The elderly lady bore the name of Princess Drubetskoy, one of the best families of Russia, but she was poor, had long since left society, and had lost her former connections. She had come now to solicit an appointment to the guards for her only son. She had invited herself and come to Anna Pavlovna’s soir&#233;e only in order to see Prince Vassily, only for that had she listened to the viscount’s story. Prince Vassily’s words frightened her; her once beautiful face showed spite, but that lasted no more than a moment. She smiled again and took a slightly stronger grip on Prince Vassily’s arm.
“Listen, Prince,” she said, “I’ve never asked you for anything, and never will, I’ve never reminded you of my father’s friendship for you. But now, I adjure you in God’s name, do this for my son, and I will consider you my benefactor,” she added hastily. “No, don’t be angry, but promise me. I asked Golitsyn and he refused. Soyez le bon enfant que vous avez &#233;t&#233;,” she said, trying to smile, though there were tears in her eyes.
“Pap&#225;, we’ll be late,” said Princess H&#233;l&#232;ne, who was waiting at the door, turning her beautiful head on her classical shoulders.
But influence in society is a capital that must be used sparingly, lest it disappear. Prince Vassily knew that and, having once realized that if he were to solicit for everyone who solicited from him, it would soon become impossible for him to solicit for himself, he rarely used his influence. In Princess Drubetskoy’s case, however, after her new appeal, he felt something like a pang of conscience. She had reminded him of the truth: he owed his first steps in the service to her father. Besides, he could see from the way she behaved that she was one of those women, especially mothers, who, once they take something into their heads, will not leave off until their desire is fulfilled, and are otherwise prepared to pester you every day and every minute, and even to make scenes. This last consideration gave him pause.
“Ch&#232;re Anna Mikhailovna,” he said, with his usual tone of familiarity and boredom, “it is almost impossible for me to do what you want; but to prove to you how much I love you and honor the memory of your late father, I will do the impossible: your son will be transferred to the guards, here is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?”
“My dear, you are our benefactor! I expected nothing else from you; I knew how kind you are.”
He was about to leave.
“Wait, two more words. Une fois pass&#233; aux gardes…” She faltered. “You’re on good terms with Mikhail Ilarionovich Kutuzov, recommend Boris as his adjutant. Then I’ll be at peace and…”
Prince Vassily smiled.
“That I will not promise you. You know how besieged Kutuzov has been since he was appointed commander in chief. He told me himself that all the Moscow ladies are conspiring to send their children to be his adjutants.”
“No, you must promise, I won’t let you go, my dear benefactor.”
“Pap&#225;,” the beauty repeated in the same tone, “we’ll be late.”
“Well, au revoir, good-bye, you see…”
“So you’ll speak to the sovereign tomorrow?”
“Without fail, but to Kutuzov I don’t promise.”
“No, do promise, do promise, Basile,” Anna Mikhailovna said behind him, with the smile of a young coquette, which must have suited her very well once, but now did not go with her emaciated face.
She evidently forgot her age and employed, out of habit, all her old feminine resources. But as soon as he left, her face again acquired the same cold, sham expression it had had before. She went back to the circle, where the viscount was going on with his story, and again pretended to listen, waiting for the moment to leave, since her business was done.
“But how do you find all this latest comedy du sacre de Milan,” asked Anna Pavlovna. “Et la nouvelle com&#233;die des peuples de G&#234;nes et de Lucques, qui viennent pr&#233;senter leurs voeux &#224; M. Buonaparte. M. Buonaparte assis sur un tr&#244;ne, et exau&#231;ant les voeux des nations! Adorable! Non, mais c’est &#224; en devenir folle! On dirait, que le monde entier a perdu la t&#234;te.”
Prince Andrei grinned, looking straight into Anna Pavlovna’s face.
“‘Dieu me la donne, gare &#224; qui la touche,’” he said (Bonaparte’s words, spoken as the crown was placed on him). “On dit qu’il a &#233;t&#233; tr&#232;s beau en pronon&#231;ant ces paroles,” he added, and repeated the words once more in Italian: “‘Dio mi la dona, guai a chi la tocca.’”
“J’esp&#232;re enfin,” Anna Pavlovna continued, “que &#231;a a &#233;t&#233; la goutte d’eau qui fera d&#233;border le verre. Les souverains ne peuvent plus supporter cet homme, qui menace tout.”
“Les souverains? Je ne parle pas de la Russie,” the viscount said courteously and hopelessly. “Les souverains, madame? Qu’ont-ils fait pour Louis XVI, pour la reine, pour madame Elisabeth?Rien,” he continued, growing animated. “Et croyez-moi, ils subissent la punition pour leur trahison de la cause des Bourbons. Les souverains? Ils envoient des ambassadeurs complimenter l’usurpateur.”
And with a contemptuous sigh, he again changed position. At these words, Prince Ippolit, who had long been gazing at the viscount through his lorgnette, suddenly turned his whole body to the little princess and, asking her for a needle, began showing her the coat of arms of the Cond&#233;s, drawing with the needle on the table. He explained this coat of arms to her with a significant air, as if the princess had asked him about it.
“Baton de gueules, engr&#234;l&#233; de gueules d’azur—maison Cond&#233;,” he said.
The princess listened, smiling.
“If Bonaparte remains on the throne of France for another year,” the viscount continued the new conversation, with the air of a man who does not listen to others, but, in matters known better to him than to anyone else, follows only the train of his own thoughts, “things will go too far. Intrigues, coercion, banishments, executions will forever destroy French society—I mean good society—and then…”
He shrugged his shoulders and spread his arms. Pierre was about to say something: the conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna, who was keeping watch on him, interrupted.
“The emperor Alexander,” she said, with the sadness that always accompanied her talk about the imperial family, “declared that he would leave it to the French themselves to choose their form of government. And I think there’s no doubt that the whole nation, freed of the usurper, will throw itself into the arms of the lawful king,” Anna Pavlovna said, trying to be amiable to the &#233;migr&#233; and royalist.
“That’s doubtful,” said Prince Andrei. “Monsieur le vicomte quite rightly supposes that things have already gone too far. I think it would be hard to return to the old ways.”
“From what I’ve heard,” Pierre, blushing, again mixed into the conversation, “almost all the nobility have already gone over to Bonaparte’s side.”
“It’s the Bonapartists who say that,” said the viscount, not looking at Pierre. “Right now it’s hard to know public opinion in France.”
“Bonaparte l’a dit,” Prince Andrei said with a grin. (It was evident that he did not like the viscount and that, though he was not looking at him, his talk was directed against him.)
“‘Je leur ai montr&#233; le chemin de la gloire,’” he said after a short silence, again repeating the words of Napoleon, “‘ils n’en ont pas voulu; je leur ai ouvert mes antichambres, ils se sont pr&#233;cipit&#233;s en foule…’ Je ne sais pas &#224; quel point il a eu le droit de le dire.”
“Aucun,” the viscount retorted. “After the duke’s murder, even the most partial people ceased to see a hero in him. Si m&#234;me &#231;a a &#233;t&#233; un h&#233;ros pour certains gens,” the viscount said, turning to Anna Pavlovna, “depuis l’assassinat du duc il y a un martyr de plus dans le ciel, un h&#233;ros de moins sur la terre.”
Before Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to smile appreciatively at these words of the viscount’s, Pierre again burst into the conversation, and Anna Pavlovna, though she anticipated that he would say something improper, could no longer stop him.
“The execution of the duc d’Enghien,” said Pierre, “was a necessity of state; and I precisely see greatness of soul in the fact that Napoleon was not afraid to take upon himself alone the responsibility for this act.”
“Dieu! mon dieu!” Anna Pavlovna whispered in a frightened whisper.
“Comment, monsieur Pierre, vous trouvez que l’assassinat est grandeur d’&#226;me?” said the little princess, smiling and drawing her work towards her.
“Ah! Oh!” said various voices.
“Capital!” Prince Ippolit said in English and began slapping his knee with his palm. The viscount merely shrugged.
Pierre gazed triumphantly at his listeners over his spectacles.
“I say that,” he went on desperately, “because the Bourbons fled from the revolution, abandoning the people to anarchy; and Napoleon alone was able to understand the revolution, to defeat it, and therefore, for the sake of the common good, he could not stop short at the life of a single man.”
“Wouldn’t you like to move to that table?” asked Anna Pavlovna. But Pierre, not answering, went on with his speech.
“No,” he said, growing more and more inspired, “Napoleon is great, because he stood above the revolution, put an end to its abuses, and kept all that was good—the equality of citizens and freedom of speech and of the press—and that is the only reason why he gained power.”
“Yes, if he had taken that power and, without using it for murder, given it to the lawful king,” said the viscount, “then I would call him a great man.”
“He couldn’t do that. The people gave him power only so that he could deliver them from the Bourbons, and because the people saw a great man in him. The revolution was a great thing,” M’sieur Pierre went on, showing by this desperate and provocative parenthetical phrase his great youth and desire to speak everything out all the sooner.
“Revolution and regicide a great thing?…After that…wouldn’t you like to move to that table?” Anna Pavlovna repeated.
“Contrat social,” the viscount said with a meek smile.
“I’m not talking about regicide. I’m talking about ideas.”
“Yes, the ideas of pillage, murder, and regicide,” an ironic voice interrupted again.
“Those were extremes, to be sure, but the whole meaning wasn’t in them, the meaning was in the rights of man, emancipation from prejudice, the equality of citizens; and Napoleon kept all these ideas in all their force.”
“Liberty and equality,” the viscount said scornfully, as if finally deciding to prove seriously to this young man all the stupidity of his talk, “these are resounding words that have long been compromised. Who doesn’t love liberty and equality? Our Savior already preached liberty and equality. Did people become happier after the revolution? On the contrary. We wanted liberty, but Bonaparte destroyed it.”
Prince Andrei kept glancing with a smile now at Pierre, now at the viscount, now at the hostess. For the first moment of Pierre’s outburst, Anna Pavlovna was horrified, accustomed though she was to society; but when she saw that despite the blasphemous speeches uttered by Pierre, the viscount did not lose his temper, and when she became certain that it was now impossible to suppress these speeches, she gathered her forces and, joining the viscount, attacked the orator.
“Mais, mon cher monsieur Pierre,” said Anna Pavlovna, “how do you explain a great man who could execute a duke, or, finally, any simple man, without a trial and without guilt?”
“I’d like to ask,” said the viscount, “how monsieur explains the eighteenth Brumaire. Was that not a deception? C’est un escamotage, qui ne ressemble nullement &#224; la mani&#232;re d’agir d’un grand homme.”
“And the prisoners he killed in Africa?” said the little princess. “It’s terrible!” And she shrugged her shoulders.
“C’est un roturier, vous aurez beau dire,” said Prince Ippolit.
M’sieur Pierre did not know whom to answer, looked around at them all, and smiled. His smile was not like that of other people, blending into a non-smile. With him, on the contrary, when a smile came, his serious and even somewhat sullen face vanished suddenly, instantly, and another appeared—childish, kind, even slightly stupid, and as if apologetic.
To the viscount, who was meeting him for the first time, it was clear that this Jacobin was not at all as frightening as his words. Everyone fell silent.
“Do you want him to answer everybody at once?” asked Prince Andrei. “Besides, in the acts of a statesman one must distinguish among the acts of the private person, the military leader, and the emperor. So it seems to me.”
“Yes, yes, of course,” Pierre picked up, gladdened by the arrival of unexpected help.
“It’s impossible not to admit,” Prince Andrei went on, “that Napoleon was a great man on the bridge of Arcole, and in the Jaffa hospital, when he shook hands with the plague victims, but…there are other acts which are hard to justify.”
Prince Andrei, who evidently wanted to soften the awkwardness of Pierre’s speech, got up, intending to leave and making a sign to his wife.
Suddenly Prince Ippolit rose and, gesturing for everyone to stay and sit down, began to speak:
“Ah! aujourd’hui on m’a racont&#233; une anecdote moscovite, charmante: il faut que je vous en r&#233;gale. Vous m’excusez, vicomte, il faut que je raconte en russe. Autrement on ne sentira pas le sel de l’histoire.”
And Prince Ippolit began to speak in Russian, with a pronunciation such as Frenchmen have after spending a year in Russia. Everyone stayed: so animatedly, so insistently did Prince Ippolit call for attention to his story.
“In Moscou there is a ladee, une dame. And she is very stingee. She must ’ave two valets de pied behind the carriage. And of very grand height. That was in her taste. Now, she ‘ad une femme de chambre, also of grand height. She said…”
Here Prince Ippolit fell to thinking, evidently having a hard time working it out.
“She said…yes, she said: ‘Girl’ (to the femme de chambre), ‘put on a livr&#233;e and come with me, behind the carriage, faire des visites.’”
Here Prince Ippolit snorted and guffawed, far in advance of his listeners, which produced an impression unfavorable to the narrator. Many smiled, however, the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna among them.
“So she went. Suddenly there was a strong wind. The girl lost her hat, and her long hairs came undone…”
Here he could no longer control himself and began laughing fitfully, saying through his laughter:
“And the whole world found out…”
With that the anecdote ended. Though it was not clear why he had told it, and why it absolutely had to be told in Russian, all the same Anna Pavlovna and the others appreciated Prince Ippolit’s social grace, in thus pleasantly putting an end to M’sieur Pierre’s unpleasant and ungracious outburst. After the anecdote, the conversation broke up into small, insignificant commentaries on past and future balls, on performances, and on who would see whom when and where.

V
Having thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charmante soir&#233;e, the guests began to leave.
Pierre was clumsy. Fat, unusually tall, broad, with enormous red hands, he did not, as they say, know how to enter a salon, and still less did he know how to leave one, that is, by saying something especially pleasant at the door. Besides that, he was absentminded. Getting up, he took a three-cornered hat with a general’s plumage instead of his own and held on to it, plucking at the feathers, until the general asked him to give it back. But all his absentmindedness and inability to enter a salon and speak in it were redeemed by his expression of good nature, simplicity, and modesty. Anna Pavlovna turned to him and, with a Christian meekness expressing forgiveness for his outburst, nodded to him and said:
“I hope to see you again, but I also hope that you will change your opinions, my dear M’sieur Pierre,” she said.
When she said this to him, he made no reply, but only bowed and once more showed everyone his smile, which said nothing except perhaps this: “Opinions are opinions, but you see what a good and nice fellow I am.” And everyone, including Anna Pavlovna, involuntarily felt it.
Prince Andrei went out to the front hall and, offering his shoulders to the footman, who was putting his cloak on him, listened indifferently to his wife’s chatter with Prince Ippolit, who also came out to the front hall. Prince Ippolit stood beside the pretty, pregnant princess and looked at her directly and intently through his lorgnette.
“Go in, Annette, you’ll catch cold,” said the little princess, taking leave of Anna Pavlovna. “C’est arr&#234;t&#233;,” she added softly.
Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak with Liza about the match she was contriving between Anatole and the little princess’s sister-in-law.
“I’m relying on you, my dear friend,” Anna Pavlovna said, also softly, “you’ll write to her and tell me comment le p&#232;re envisagera la chose. Au revoir.” And she left the front hall.
Prince Ippolit went over to the little princess and, bringing his face down close to hers, began saying something to her in a half whisper. Two footmen, one the princess’s, the other his, waiting for them to finish talking, stood with shawl and redingote and listened to their French talk, which they could not understand, with such faces as if they understood what was being said but did not want to show it. The princess, as usual, talked smilingly and listened laughingly.
“I’m very glad I didn’t go to the ambassador’s,” said Prince Ippolit, “it’s boring…A wonderful evening. Wonderful, isn’t it so?”
“They say the ball will be very nice,” replied the princess, her slightly mustached lip pulling upwards. “All the beautiful society women will be there.”
“Not all, since you won’t be there; not all,” said Prince Ippolit, laughing joyfully, and, snatching the shawl from the footman, even shoving him, he began putting it on the princess. Either from awkwardness or intentionally (no one would have been able to tell), he was a long while lowering his arms, even when the shawl was already put on, and it was as if he was embracing the young woman.
Graciously, but still smiling, she withdrew, turned, and looked at her husband. Prince Andrei’s eyes were shut, which made him look tired and sleepy.
“Are you ready, madame?” he asked his wife, looking past her.
Prince Ippolit hastily put on his redingote, which, in the new style, hung lower than his heels, and, tangling himself in it, ran to the porch after the princess, whom the footman was helping into the carriage.
“Princesse, au revoir,” he cried, his tongue getting as tangled as his feet.
The princess, picking up her dress, was settling herself in the darkness of the carriage; her husband was straightening his sword; Prince Ippolit, on the pretext of being of service, got in everyone’s way.
“Ex-cuse me, sir,” Prince Andrei, with dry unpleasantness, addressed himself in Russian to Prince Ippolit, who was standing in his way.
“I’ll be waiting for you, Pierre,” the same voice of Prince Andrei said gently and tenderly.
The postilion touched up the horses, and the wheels of the carriage rumbled. Prince Ippolit laughed fitfully, standing on the porch and waiting for the viscount, whom he had promised to take home.
“Eh, bien, mon cher, votre petite princesse est tr&#232;s bien, tr&#232;s bien,” said the viscount, getting into the carriage with Ippolit. “Mais tr&#232;s bien.” He kissed the tips of his fingers. “Et tout-&#224;-fait fran&#231;aise.”
Ippolit laughed with a snort.
“Et savez-vous que vous &#234;tes terrible avec votre petit air innocent,” the viscount continued. “Je plains le pauvre mari, ce petit officier, qui se donne des airs de prince r&#233;gnant.”
Ippolit snorted again and said through his laughter:
“Et vous disiez, que les dames russes ne valaient pas les dames fran&#231;aises. Il faut savoir s’y prendre.”
Pierre, arriving first, went to Prince Andrei’s study, being a familiar of the house, and, as was his habit, at once lay down on the sofa, took the first book that caught his eye from the shelf (it was Caesar’s Commentaries), and, leaning on his elbow, began reading it from the middle.
“What have you done to mademoiselle Scherer? She’ll be quite ill now,” said Prince Andrei, coming into his study and rubbing his small white hands.
Pierre swung his whole body so that the sofa creaked, turned his animated face to Prince Andrei, smiled, and waved his hand.
“No, that abb&#233; is very interesting, only he has the wrong notion of things…In my opinion, eternal peace is possible, but I don’t know how to say it…Only it’s not through political balance…”
Prince Andrei was obviously not interested in these abstract conversations.
“Mon cher, you can’t go saying what you think everywhere. Well, so, have you finally decided on anything? Are you going to be a horse guard or a diplomat?” Prince Andrei asked after a moment’s silence.
Pierre sat up on the sofa with both legs tucked under him.
“Can you imagine, I still don’t know. I don’t like either of them.”
“But you must decide on something. Your father’s waiting.”
At the age of ten, Pierre had been sent abroad with an abb&#233;-tutor and had remained there until he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow, his father dismissed the abb&#233; and said to the young man: “Go to Petersburg now, look around, and choose. I’ll agree to anything. Here’s a letter to Prince Vassily, and here’s some money. Write to me about everything, I’ll help you in everything.” Pierre had been choosing a career for three months already and had done nothing. This was the choice that Prince Andrei was talking about with him. Pierre rubbed his forehead.
“But he must be a Mason,” he said, meaning the abb&#233; he had seen at the soir&#233;e.
“That’s all rubbish,” Prince Andrei stopped him again, “better let’s talk about business. Have you been to the horse guards?…”
“No, I haven’t, but here’s what’s come into my head and I wanted to tell you. There’s war now against Napoleon. If it were a war for freedom, I could understand it, I’d be the first to go into military service; but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world…is not right.”
Prince Andrei merely shrugged his shoulders at Pierre’s childish talk. He made it look as though he could not reply to such stupidity; but in fact it was hard to reply to this na&#239;ve question in any other way than Prince Andrei had done.
“If everyone made war only according to his own convictions, there would be no war,” he said.
“And that would be excellent,” said Pierre.
Prince Andrei smiled.
“It might very well be excellent, but it will never happen…”
“Well, what makes you go to war?” asked Pierre.
“What makes me? I don’t know. I have to. Besides, I’m going…” He paused. “I’m going because this life I lead here, this life—is not for me!”